---
layout: default
title: "Ruby-on-rails to Phoenix: Porting the blogs tutorial"
categories: ruby rails phoenix
date: 2024-12-07
excerpt: "Chip-8 emulator implemented in golang with raylib. Iteration wise description."
---

# Ruby-on-rails to Phoenix: Porting the blogs tutorial
## Preface
Too many social media comments about Ruby-on-Rails is best suited for rapid prototyping. Similarly high praises to Elixir-Phoenix framework, especially from folks who have worked on both. 
But there is no easy `Getting Started` tutorial for Phoenix. In fact Phoenix has quite high entry barrier before things start making sense. This is easier if someone is coming from RoR world, but for someone starting Phoenix directly from Python-Flask, things look quite complex.
I believe beginner documentation is one of the important things holding Phoenix back vis-a-vis RoR.

So, this is my attempt to recreate Ruby-on-Rails `Blog` tutorial in Phoenix, with roughly same set of steps.

Here is [link](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/getting_started.html#starting-up-the-web-server) to Ruby tutorial I am following and porting. 

## Installation and setup (Step 1 - 3)
Installation and setup for both Ruby on Rails stack and Elixir-Phoenix stack is equally easy or complex, depending on OS version. For me, using Ubuntu 22.04 in 2024, I can't use system packages for Ruby on Rails. So I used `rbenv` to install Ruby 3.2 and then installed rails 8.0 following  tutorial instructions.

For Elixir, I used system provided version `1.12.2`. For latest Phoenix (especially with LiveView 1.0) I'll need to use version manager like `asdf`. I am using Phoenix version 1.6.6

## 3.2 Creating Blog Application:
For creating new Phoenix project, we have to use `mix` which is generic Elixir generator. `mix phx.new blogs --database sqlite3` this command will scaffold entire project and set up DB connection. Only difference compared to Rails command is explicit `--database sqlite3` specification. By default `Ecto` which is database handler for Elixir and Phoenix uses `PostgreSQL`.

## 4.1 Starting up the server:
`mix phx.server` this command starts a development server at Port `4000`. I was already running another Phoenix app on this port, so I had to change `config/dev.exs -> config :blogs, BlogsWeb.Endpoint -> http: [ip: {127, 0, 0, 1}, port: 4000]`. I changed it to 4001 and server started without any issue.

## 4.2 Adding a controller:
Create a file `article_controller.ex` in `lib/blogs_web/controllers/` folder and add following content:

```elixir
defmodule BlogsWeb.ArticleController do
  use BlogsWeb, :controller

  def index(conn, _params) do
    render(conn, "index.html")
  end
end
```

`index` function of controller renders `index.html.heex` file as `index.html`. Add `index.html.heex` file in `lib/blogs_web/templates/article` folder (create folder if necessary) and add following content:

```html
<h2>Hello World</h2>
```

Finally, edit `lib/blogs_web/router.ex`. In `Scope "/", BlogsWeb` scope, we need to add route line: `get "/articles", ArticleController, :index`

For setting root page, I just added `get "/", ArticleController, :index` line in same scope.

This should render our hello world page at `/articles`.

### Difference with Rails:
This is first step where we can see some difference in approaches. For Rails, I don't know what all configuration changes are needed to add a controller manually. But it is easy to just run generator command. 

For Phoenix `mix phx.gen.html` generates all views for CRUD operation. But adding a controller is just adding a file in controllers folder. 

Another difference is explicit call to "index.html" in render function. This will render embedded html file `index.html.heex`. Here Phoenix prefers configuration over convention.

One convention part in Phoenix is `Article` controller's views are listed in `templates/article` folder.

## 6.1 Generating model:
For model generation, mix generator is useful since it creates model struct file and migration file. To generate model, run this command: `mix phx.gen.schema Article articles title:string body:string`. This will create `article.ex` file in `lib/blogs` with schema definition and changeset function. It will also create migration in `prov/repo/migrations` folder. 

## 6.2 Migrating model:
To apply migrations and create table, run `mix ecto.migrate`.

So far this is pretty much same what we do in Rails.

## 6.3 Interacting with the Database using console:
This is the part where Elixir shines over Ruby. Since Elixir is a functional language, all parts of Phoenix syntax can be evaluated independently by calling underlying function. 

E.g. in Phoenix/Ecto, a model is represented as a struct. `Repo` module takes care of interacting with actual database. So, to create a new DB record and insert into DB, we need to follow these steps:
- Start console by running `iex -S mix` command. From this console, we can call functions within project directly.
- Create struct instance with data: `record = %Blogs.Article{title: "abcd", body: "zxcv"}`
- Insert record into DB: `Blogs.Repo.insert(record)`

### Get an Article by id
- `Blogs.Repo.get(Blogs.Article, id)`

### Get all articles
- `Blogs.Repo.all(Blogs.Article)`

## 6.4 Show list of articles in index page
To show list of articles in a page, we need to change 2 things:
1. In controller, get list of articles and pass it as data to embedded html.heex page
2. In embedded html, read this list and create a dom element (`li` in this case) for each item in the list

For passing list of articles to embedded view, change `index` function to following code:
```elixir
def index(conn, _params) do
    render(conn, "index.html", articles: Repo.all(Article))
end
```
Here we are passing the list of all articles as an `assigns` map. This map is accessible to embedded view page.

In heex page, we can access this list and render a list using following code:
```html
<ul>
    <%= for entry <- @articles do %>
        <li> 
            <p><%= entry.title %></p> 
            <p> <a> Update </a> </p> 
            <p> <a> Delete </a> </p>
        </li>             
    <% end %>
</ul>    
```
`@articles` in above code refers to `articles` passed to `render` function. Using HEEX DSL syntax for looping `<%= for entry <- @articles do %>` we can loop over each article as value of `entry`.

We'll update link to update and delete operations later.

### Comparison with Rails:
This part is also pretty similar to Rails counterpart. Only noticable difference is that Rails passes value to view by assigning it to a `@variable`, whereas in Phoenix, `render` functions takes a Map (Hash or Dict) argument and passes it to the view.

## 7.1 Showing a single article
At this point, it should be pretty clear on how to show a single article. Basically we need to fetch an article from DB in the controller function and pass it as an `assign` to embedded view file. In view file, we need to add embedded code to render html tags with article details.

Let's go through all steps.
1. Adding route:
Add `get "/articles/:id", ArticleController, :show` line to `router.ex`. This line says that any url like `"/articles/5"` should call ArticleController.show function with 5 as a parameter.

2. Add controller code:
In `article_controller.ex` add show function. 
```elixir
def show(conn, %{"id" => id}) do
    render(conn, "show.html", article: Repo.get(Article, id))
end
```
Here instead of passing params to function and retrieving id inside function body, we can use elixir's pattern matching `%{"id" => id}` to get id in declaration line itself. Then we get article from DB and pass it as `article` key's value in `assigns`.

3. In embedded html generate tag to show article:
We have mentioned `show.html` in controller function. So our embedded files name must be `show.html.heex`. Add following markup to this file:
```
<h1> <%= @article.title %> </h1>

<p>
    <%= @article.body %>
</p>
```
This is straightforward. We take `article` value passed to view and show title and body.

### Comparison with Rails:
Again, difference between Rails and Phoenix is minimal for this part.

## 7.2 Resourceful routing
Instead of adding custom route for basic CRUD operations, we can add single line to generate all routes. To do so, replace all routes we have added so far in `router.ex` with this line
`resources "/articles", ArticleController`

Now, to see which all routes are generateed and which controller function will be called for each, we should run the command `mix phx.routes`. 

This will show a table. First column of this table is helper function which can be used to retrieve path from controller function name. Second column is HTTP method. Third is actual route and fourth column indicates controller module and function associated with this route.

E.g. `article_path  GET     /articles/:id                          BlogsWeb.ArticleController :show` This line tells me a GET route "/articles/:id" corresponds to :show method of ArticleController. Also, since route is parameterized, controller function will recieve key-value pair for `id` in the `params` argument.

We can use helper function to get route, so that even if route string is modified, the called function remains same. Let's add a route to create new article in index page. Add following line in the `index.html.heex` before showing list of articles:
```html
<a href={Routes.article_path(@conn, :new)}> New Article </a>
```
We use `Routes.article_path` helper function and pass `:new` controller name to ensure that we get route string to new article page.

### Comparison with rails:
Not much difference.


## 7.3 Create new article
When listing routes for resources, you may have noticed two different routes for same task. 

`article_path  GET     /articles/new    BlogsWeb.ArticleController :new`
and 
`article_path  POST    /articles        BlogsWeb.ArticleController :create`

but notice first one is `GET` route while second one is for `POST`. Basic idea here is that `/new` route presents a page with form fields and get all necessary input for creating new resource record, which is Article in our case.

Then, on submitting the form, we should send all fields to `POST` route where new record will be created and saved to DB.

Corresponding controller functions should have following code:
```elixir
def new(conn, _params) do
    render(conn, "new.html", formdata: Article.changeset(%Article{}, %{}))
end

def create(conn, %{"article" => article}) do
    %Article{} |> Article.changeset(article) |> Repo.insert
    redirect(conn, to: "/")
end
```
Notice that `create` function saves Article and redirects to "/" route.

## 7.3.1 Creating Form
Let's create a form and take all inputs needed to create new Article. We'll need 'title' and 'body' input fields. While we can create plain HTML form, Phoenix provides us with some utilities which we will generate `Article` object instead of individual fields after submitting.

Create a new file `new.html.heex` and following code to create new Article form
```html
<h2> New Article Form </h2>

<.form let={f} for={@formdata} action={Routes.article_path(@conn, :create)}>
    <%= label f, :title %>
    <%= text_input f, :title %>

    <%= label f, :body %>
    <%= textarea f, :body %>

    <%= submit "Save" %>

</.form>
```

### Explanation:
- `.form` utility needs a changeset instead of struct
- We create an empty changeset for Article in the controller function and pass it as `formdata` to view
- In view html file, we bind `@formdata` as `f` using `let` and `for` attributes.
- We specify action attribute to explicitly set submit route to `:create` function
- Withing form, each element function needs associated form as an argument to bind input to corresponding model field.

### Comparison with Rails:
- Rails uses empty record to bind with form, Phoenix uses changeset
- Rails form syntax feels more natural. Phoenix form syntax is yet to stabilize. They had 2 variation of `form` and finally `.form` for live mode. Perhaps it will become easy after maturity.

## 7.4 Updating an article
Similar to create, there are 3 relevent routes for update. 
1. `:update` using PATCH
2. `:update` using PUT
3. `:edit` using GET

The usage is also similar. We use `:edit` to get to edit form with prefilled fields. On clicking Submit button we send updated values to `:update` using PATCH or PUT. I'll pick PATCH method here.

Here are controller methods for update:
```elixir
def edit(conn, %{"id" => id}) do
    render(conn, "edit.html", formdata: Article.changeset(
        %Article{}, Map.from_struct(Repo.get(Article, id))), id: id)
end

def update(conn, params) do
    IO.inspect(params)
    Repo.get(Article, params["id"]) |> Article.changeset(params["article"])
        |> IO.inspect |> Repo.update
    redirect(conn, to: "/")
end
```
Compared to creating new article, there few key changes:
1. We pass id of article to be edited
2. We fetch article for that id using `Repo.get`
3. We create a `Map` from this article and pass it to `Article.changeset` function. This function takes 2 arguments, first the Struct for which to create the changeset and second the map from which to fill the values. So we have to do this rather odd way of generating the changeset.
4. We pass both values and id to view page. id is required to generate form action link.
5. In update, we first get the article using `Repo.get` then update it using `Article.changeset` function and finally save using `Repo.update` function

View page for edit similar to new page:
```html
<h2>Article</h2>

<.form let={f} for={@formdata} action={Routes.article_path(@conn, :update, @id)}  method="patch">
    <%= label f, :title %>
    <%= text_input f, :title %>

    <%= label f, :body %>
    <%= textarea f, :body %>

    <%= submit "Save" %>

</.form>
```

We also need to update index page to add update link to this page.
```html
<p> <a href={Routes.article_path(@conn, :edit, entry.id)}> Update </a> </p> 
```
We added path to update with id of entry.

### Comparison with Rails:
Only ORM/DB methods are slightly different. Basic workflow is same for both frameworks.

## 7.5 Delete an Article
Delete is easier compared to new and update workflows. We simply pass the id to be deleted, delete the article and redirect to index page.

The controller function looks like this:
```elixir
def delete(conn, params) do
    Repo.get(Article, params["id"]) |> Repo.delete
    redirect(conn, to: "/")
end
```

And Delete link in index.html.heex should be updated as:
```html
<p> <%= link "Delete", to: Routes.article_path(@conn, :delete, entry.id),
                    method: :delete, data: [confirm: "Are you sure?"] %> </p> 
```
Notice few differences here:
- We use `link` function to generate anchor tag instead of using html tag directly
- We add method `delete` so that it redirects to "/article/:id" for deletion 
- There is a confirmation message parameter which is shown as alert in browser window

### Comparison with Rails:
Minimal difference. `link` function arguments are pretty much same in Rails' `link_to` function


## Conclusion
This concludes the tutorial. My personal objective was to give an immidiate starting point to those migrating from Rails to Phoenix. I know that this is not a self standing tutorial for anybody looking to start Phoenix directly. Perhaps in future I'll write a complete standalone version of it.